[eerie music]
*
(male narrator)
One of science's
greatest theories,
evolution,
is under attack.
The threat is emerging
from the only scientific
superpower on earth,
provoking some of the biggest
names in science to hit back.
(Dawkins)
It's enormously damaging
if the world's leading
economic power was subverted
and undermined by this kind
of antiscientific tendency.
(narrator)
The controversy surrounds
a new explanation
for the diversity
of life on Earth.
For many, it threatens
to replace science with God.
(Attenborough)
It is so
fundamentally against
every scientific principle
that you can think of,
that to put it
in the same bracket
is to seriously
confuse thinking.
(narrator)
And yet, this new idea
is gaining
powerful support.
(Bush)
May God bless you,
and may He watch over
the United States of America.
[cheering]
(narrator)
This is the story of a battle
between faith and knowledge,
a defining moment
in the scientific landscape
of the 21st century.
(Miller)
I truly regard
America's scientific soul
to be at stake
in this struggle.
And losing that, I think,
would be a great tragedy.
[dramatic orchestral music]
*
(man)
I don't know of any better way
than just to call it what it is.
It's The Monkey Song,
and it's about the ridiculous
theory of evolution
that refutes
the Bible account of creation.
(girl)
* I'm no kin to the monkey,
no, no, no. *
* The monkey's no kin to me,
yeah, yeah, yeah. *
* I don't know much
about his ancestors, *
* but mine didn't swing
from a tree. *
(narrator)
In September 2005,
a landmark legal case
began in America.
On trial was one of
the greatest names in science,
Charles Darwin.
[shutters clicking]
There is, in fact, a legitimate
scientific controversy
over Darwin's
theory of evolution.
(narrator)
What started as
a local high school dispute
has spiraled
into a battle
that pitted God
against science.
The spark for this conflict
is a controversial new idea
that directly
challenges Darwin.
It is called
"intelligent design."
(man)
What's your opinion
on intelligent design?
(man)
My opinion on
intelligent design
is that it is a legitimate
scientific theory.
(narrator)
The supporters
of intelligent design
make an extraordinary claim:
to have found
scientific evidence
for a supernatural
creator of life.
All of the leading
scientific organizations
have taken a position
that intelligent design
is not science,
that it injects a conflict
between science and religion
where none need exist.
(narrator)
From America to Europe,
the popularity
of the movement is growing.
For many,
it could mark the beginning
of a scientific dark age.
(woman)
If you can lie
to kids about science,
if you can lie
to the American public
about science,
you can lie to them
about anything.
And that's why this case
is so important.
(narrator)
This case is the latest
in a battle
that stretches
back almost 150 years,
to a single book,
On the Origin of Species.
With his theory of evolution,
Charles Darwin shattered the
fundamental beliefs of his time.
He hypothesized
that all life on Earth
had descended from the first
simple organisms,
that we were just another animal
on a great tree of life.
For the first time,
science had directly challenged
the biblical story
of creation.
The conflict continues
to this day.
(Attenborough)
Quite a lot of people
are upset
that the findings
of evolutionary science
don't coincide with what
is written in Genesis.
And there are people
who think that Genesis
should be
taken literally,
that, according to Genesis,
a creator God took mud
and blew into it
and created the first man.
Now, there are people who
believe that is literally so.
And if they do so, the basis
that they think it is so
is a manuscript,
is a human document.
It's nothing to do
with the world out here.
(narrator)
The logical consequences
of Darwin's findings
were even more
unsettling.
If the story of creation
could be doubted,
so too could the existence
of the Creator.
Darwin had given rise
to a disturbing vision:
a world without God.
(Miller)
To many people,
if we are just material beings,
any notion of a grand purpose,
of a meaning to their lives,
is merely an illusion,
an illusion that Charles Darwin
smashed in 1859.
(Attenborough)
The notion that we are masters
of our destiny
is one which they found
abhorrent.
And that was why Darwin's views
were so heretical
and so upsetting.
He found them
upsetting himself.
(narrator)
Darwin likened his theory
to confessing to a murder.
But it was
the scientific evidence,
not his religious belief,
that Darwin
was compelled to accept.
The battle lines
had been drawn.
Throughout the 20th century,
religious communities in America
fought to prevent the spread
of Darwin's dangerous idea.
In 1925, in an infamous
court case in Tennessee,
high school teacher John Scopes
was tried
for teaching evolution.
(male announcer)
All attention focuses now
on the prospect
of an epic debate
of science versus religion,
reason versus faith.
(narrator)
Scopes was found guilty
and fined $100.
Now millions
of American children
learned nothing
of evolution.
Biblical creationism
dominated the classroom.
And it just seems that the birth
of every individual child
is a miracle right there,
a miracle that you can behold...
even though
it's a miracle...
(woman)
I believe
that God created the world
in seven days,
exactly, literally,
just how He said He did.
(narrator)
It took 60 years
for the creationists
to finally lose their battle.
In 1987, the highest court
in America ruled
that teaching creationism
was unconstitutional.
It violated the required
separation of church and state.
Creationism was banned
from the science curriculum.
[acoustic country music]
*
Despite the change
in the law,
the resistance to evolution
never went away.
In June 2004, no one
in the small town of Dover
could have imagined
that they would trigger
the next great battle
over the teaching of evolution.
It all began
with a struggle for control
of the local high school.
Casey and Jeff Brown were
members of the governing board
when something changed.
(Jeff Brown)
I didn't notice it
at the time,
because I didn't think
it was important.
But what
had happened,
without me ever considering
that it should matter, was,
we were getting
an overwhelming number
of fundamentalist Christians
on the board.
These people are convinced
that evolution is a hoax.
In their opinion,
nothing can contradict
anything in the Bible
and possibly be true.
(narrator)
The flashpoint came
when the board came to review
the school's
new biology textbook.
One member immediately
objected to what he read.
12 mentions of Charles Darwin
in a 1,400-page textbook.
He objected
to those 12 mentions,
and he claimed the book
was "laced with Darwinism,"
quote, unquote.
(narrator)
Brian Rehm was
a science teacher at the school
when the new board members
began to exert their influence.
(Rehm)
I was hired at Dover
in September of 2002.
I would say, by October,
I heard rumblings,
coming through
the assistant superintendent,
that the school board
had problems with evolution.
On one hand, I was shocked
when I heard about this.
On the other hand,
I wanted to laugh.
(narrator)
When Rehm discussed the issue
with the board chairman,
he was met
with more concerns.
(Rehm)
He said,
"When my children come home
from school
"and they've had evolution
biology class,
"we're going to sit down
at the dinner table,
"and I'm going to have to tell
them that you, the teacher,
has lied
to my children."
I left this meeting thinking,
I can't believe
that somebody thinks that
the teachers teaching science
are actually intentionally lying
to the children.
It just blows
my mind.
(narrator)
The wave of antievolutionary
sentiment
continued to take over.
(Jeff Brown)
At our next meeting,
some of us were discussing
the drawbacks
of teaching creationism,
mainly that it is illegal,
at which point Mr. Buckingham
looked at me and said,
"2,000 years ago,
someone died on a cross for us.
Isn't it about time
we do something for him?"
(Rehm)
At that point in time,
I saw where they were going.
The school board
is anti-teacher,
anti-public education.
They're antiscience.
And I said,
"I'm getting out."
(Casey Brown)
My feeling,
coming out of the meeting,
was fear.
I knew we were in
the minority at that point.
(narrator)
This was just a prelude.
Dover was to become
the focus for a new battle
between Darwin's
theory of evolution
and its most
formidable opponent yet,
intelligent design.
The man behind the latest
challenge to Darwin
is Phillip Johnson,
celebrated lawyer
and born-again Christian.
In the late 1980s,
Johnson began developing
a strategy to overthrow Darwin,
to reclaim
the story of creation.
For Johnson, the theory of
evolution was not just science;
it was the cornerstone
of Western culture.
(Johnson)
The Darwinian theory
of evolution
is the grand creation story
of our culture.
Every culture
has a creation story--
creation myth,
if you like.
Now, the creation story
is the basis
for every kind of knowledge
in that culture.
And for that reason,
the experts
who have the authority
to tell the creation story
to the public
have great power.
And they always have--
or at least want--
a monopoly of that power.
They don't want
to share it to anybody.
(narrator)
As a lawyer,
there was an obvious way
for Johnson
to challenge Darwin.
He would put him
on trial.
(Johnson)
How much of this
grand creative story
has anybody
ever actually seen?
How much can be tested
by experiment,
and what have
the experiments been?
(narrator)
To defeat Darwin,
Johnson would have to unravel
the driving force behind
his theory, natural selection.
Natural selection explained
how life evolved
from the first
simple organisms...
how in nature,
the fittest win out...
leaving more offspring
with more of their
desirable characteristics.
This survival of the fittest
would, over time,
allow a species
to change and develop,
until eventually,
new species could arise.
Given billions of years,
natural selection could create,
unguided, the diversity
of life on Earth.
But like many before him,
Johnson was unconvinced
by the evidence.
(Johnson)
The problem
with the Darwinian story
is not that it's altogether
false, certainly;
it's that perhaps it's true
within a much more limited scale
than is usually claimed.
(narrator)
Johnson believed
Darwin's theory
was just part of a much greater
problem with science.
By attempting
to explain the world
solely through
natural causes,
science was excluding
the supernatural.
Science was
inherently antireligious.
(Johnson)
The Darwinists claim
we must keep God
and any form
of supernatural creation
out of science,
and nature
had to be capable
of doing all
of its own creating.
(narrator)
Johnson thought science
unfairly ruled out God
as a creator.
It couldn't even entertain
the possibility.
Johnson didn't know if anyone
would take him seriously,
but a fortuitous encounter
would change everything.
(Meyer)
I got a call from
a fellow graduate student.
And he told me
that he had a friend
who was a quirky law professor,
who was drop-dead brilliant.
And he'd gotten obsessed
with evolution.
He said, "Would you
talk to him?"
And he said it in such a way
that led me to think
that I probably needed
to straighten this poor guy out.
We got about 15 minutes
into the conversation
before I realized,
this quirky law professor
was indeed drop-dead brilliant,
and he had put his finger
on the pulse
of the central issue
in the debate
about biological origins.
(Johnson)
Here's somebody
getting a doctorate
in the philosophy of science
at Cambridge University
and studying these issues
at a professional level,
who has come to
much the same conclusions
through much the same process
of thinking that I have.
And we started asking
the question among ourselves:
how many more people
are there like this?
(narrator)
Together, Johnson and Meyer
went in search of scientists
who could share
their vision.
One of them was biochemist
Michael Behe.
(Behe)
Meeting other people who were
skeptical of Darwinian evolution
was really wonderful,
because if you think
something is wrong
and the whole world
thinks it's right, well,
maybe you're crazy.
But meeting
just one other person
who thinks the way that you do
and sees your reasons
and is willing to talk
about this, well,
that means
that you're not crazy.
(narrator)
Inspired by Johnson,
Behe focused
on the weakness
that Darwin had highlighted
in his theory.
(Behe)
He wrote at one point
that if it could be demonstrated
that any complex organ existed
which could not be put together
by numerous, successive,
slight modifications,
he said, my theory
would absolutely break down.
(narrator)
Darwin's theory relied
on the step-by-step evolution
of complex organisms
from simpler ones.
Behe went in search
of an organism
that didn't fit
the theory.
He became intrigued
by a mechanism
found amongst a family
of microscopic bacteria,
the flagellum.
(Behe)
Bacterial flagellum
is literally an outboard motor
that bacteria
use to swim.
(narrator)
Although on the surface the
flagellum appeared to be simple,
when Behe looked inside,
he saw a mechanism
made of 50 different
interacting parts.
You can just see from the way
that the parts are situated
that this is a machine.
(narrator)
If just one part
was missing,
the flagellum
appeared to be useless.
Anything less than the whole
simply wouldn't work.
It pointed to one thing:
that this machine had not
evolved from a simpler organism.
(Behe)
It's really, really
difficult to see
how it could be
put together gradually,
with the thing working
and getting better
at each step
of the way.
I thought to myself,
"That's it. That's the problem.
That's what Darwin's theory
has problems with."
(narrator)
Behe was certain
he had the evidence
to challenge
Darwin's theory.
If the flagellum
could not have come about
through gradual stages,
it must have been created
in its complete form.
And for that to happen,
Behe concluded
that there must have been
some form of creator,
an intelligence.
(Behe)
Eventually I came
up with a name for it.
I called it
"irreducible complexity."
(narrator)
Irreducible complexity
was a simple
but provocative idea.
It was based on the observation
of natural machines
whose parts were
so interdependent
that they could not
have evolved.
And irreducible complexity
appeared to be everywhere,
right down
to the design
of some of the smallest
building blocks of life.
(Behe)
You have to look down
to the molecular level,
and when you do that,
you see machinery.
And when you put
those two concepts together,
of looking
at molecules
and worrying about
irreducible complexity,
you can really understand
that Darwinian theory
can't explain life,
at least not all of it.
(narrator)
With the addition of
mathematician William Dembski,
the next assault on Darwin
was about to begin.
(Dembski)
I was really going solo.
I had these intuitive doubts
about Darwinian theory.
It just seemed to me
very implausible
that the sorts of things
that evolution
was supposed to explain--
the large-scale changes
in organisms--
that those could be
within the reach
of these sorts
of chance mechanisms.
(narrator)
Dembski would challenge
a concept
at the center
of evolutionary theory:
the mathematical probability
of life evolving by chance.
To do this, he would unpick
the blueprint of life,
the extraordinarily
complex code of DNA.
It's a rather
elegant molecule--
I think one might almost say
a beautiful molecule--
that carries us all
through our lives,
makes us what we are, regulates
our brains and bodies.
(narrator)
As DNA is passed from
one generation to the next,
tiny, random changes
take place.
According to
evolutionary theory,
it is these chance
genetic mutations
that generate variation
within a species
and allow evolution
to work,
over time,
creating the diversity
of life on Earth.
But Dembski doubted
the probability
of that really happening.
According to his calculations,
the complexity of nature
was beyond
the limits of chance.
Even relatively simple
organisms such as a moth
have DNA sequences hundreds
of millions of units long.
And they have to be
in such precise order
that chance alone
could not explain.
(Dembski)
There's a point at which
there's a breakdown,
and these chance-based
mechanisms cannot explain
the sorts of complexities
we see in biological systems.
(narrator)
The theory of evolution
was not just improbable;
it appeared to be
mathematically impossible.
For Dembski, there had to be
something else shaping life.
(Dembski)
The only causal power
that we know
that could produce
something like this
is intelligence.
Engineers,
human engineers,
have produced
systems like this.
(narrator)
Dembski had put together
a mathematical case
to rule out the chance mechanism
of Darwin
and rule in the organizing power
of an intelligence.
Now the movement
had a new hypothesis
to set alongside Behe's idea
of irreducible complexity.
Together,
they claimed it was evidence
for a supernatural power.
They had forged
the seemingly impossible:
evidence of a creator
based on science, not religion.
Intelligent design
had arrived.
(Johnson)
We saw an opportunity
to change the world
by moving debate away from this
Bible-versus-science stereotype
and into the question of whether
the scientific evidence,
when examined
impartially,
really justified and supported
the grand claims of Darwinism.
(narrator)
Out of Johnson's group
came a stream of books,
gatherings,
and media presentations,
each advancing
the intelligent design argument.
Many welcomed the return
of the supernatural
to the story
of creation.
They weren't the ones
they needed to convince most.
The response from
the scientific community
has been almost--
not completely but almost--
uniformly negative.
(narrator)
One of the most dismissive
responses has come
from one of Darwin's
most staunch defenders,
Richard Dawkins.
(Dawkins)
What this does
to science is,
it wastes
a lot of time
of scientists who could be
getting on with their work.
As far as I'm aware,
in no other field of science
does this happen.
Physicists don't have to fight
a kind of rearguard action
against sort of yapping terriers
of ignorance
the way biologists do.
(narrator)
For the past 30 years,
Dawkins has been on a mission
to explain evolution
and its impact
on the existence of God...
Because people cannot come
to terms with evolution,
the blind designer...
(narrator)
For Dawkins, there was only
one way to treat this assault
on his science
and his beliefs.
He simply snubbed them.
(Dawkins)
The debate format
gives the false impression
that there are here two sides
of a scientific disagreement.
That's not the case.
Creationists have
in effect won their goal
when a real scientist agrees
to have a debate with them.
And that, immediately,
carries the propaganda victory
that they crave.
(narrator)
But the proponents
of intelligent design
were more than ready
to defend their claims.
(Dembski)
This is a spirited
scientific discussion.
The problem is
that the other side
does not want to admit that
it is a scientific discussion,
because as soon
as they do,
then we have a place
at the table.
And then the critique
of evolutionary theory
that we offered
has to be taken seriously.
Scientific revolutions
have happened in the past.
We're thinking that this
is going to be one of them.
The other side thinks
that we're hopelessly misguided.
(narrator)
Despite the lack
of credibility
amongst the vast majority
of scientists,
the movement launched
by Johnson 1 1/2 decade ago
yields more power
than ever.
From his base
in Seattle,
Meyer runs a
multimillion-dollar think tank,
the Discovery Institute's
Center for Science and Culture.
It is the most
formidable force
in the battle
against evolutionary theory.
(Meyer)
There is a growing group
of dissenting scientists
around the world
who are dissenting
from Darwinian evolution.
Now over 450 scientists
have signed a list
saying that they doubt
that natural selection
can produce
the complexity of life.
It may be a minority position
within science,
but it's
a growing minority
and one which we think
has the support
of an enormous amount
of evidence
about the complexity
and interworkings
of cellular life.
(Dawkins)
When one says
that in America,
intelligent design
is getting a hold,
it is not getting a hold
in the scientific community,
in the intellectual
community.
It's getting a hold
only among those parts
of the population
who don't know anything.
(narrator)
Many critics see
in intelligent design
a greater purpose
than their stated pursuit
of science alone.
Barbara Forrest has charted
the rise of the movement
and studied the Discovery
Institute's tactics.
Their underlying aims
were exposed when, in 1999,
a fundraising document,
The Wedge, was leaked.
(Forrest)
It is designed to have
the idea of intelligent
design permeate
all of the academic
disciplines,
to change social
and political policy,
really to radically alter
the nature of American life.
And it is a very clear statement
of the religious nature
of what they're doing--
in their own words.
(narrator)
The revelations
of the leaked document
haven't held back
the movement.
(Forrest)
They have developed
a very successful PR slogan.
It's called
"teach the controversy."
That's a good little sound bite
that they use,
and it appeals to the basic
sense of fairness
that's characteristic
of the American public.
And it's the idea
that schoolchildren
should hear both sides
of a genuine controversy,
as they tell it,
that it's not fair
to deny them
this opportunity
to hear about an alternative
scientific theory.
(narrator)
And powerful people
are listening.
In August 2005,
intelligent design
received the backing
of President George W. Bush.
In an interview
with newspaper journalists,
he stated, "Both sides
ought to be taught."
(Bush)
We have a calling
from beyond the stars
to stand for freedom,
and America will always
be faithful to that cause.
[banjo music]
*
(narrator)
A world away in Dover,
Pennsylvania,
the battle over the high school
science curriculum
was still raging.
Throughout the summer of 2004,
a faction of the school board
had been trying to get
creationism
back into
the science class
but had come up against
a stumbling block.
(Jeff Brown)
The Dover school board
did not initially discuss
teaching
intelligent design.
Initially they wanted to teach
creationism,
the book of Genesis,
side-by-side with evolution,
give them equal time.
And we kept pointing out,
"This is illegal.
the Supreme Court has said
you can't do that.
(narrator)
The dispute had already driven
science teacher Brian Rehm
out of his job.
But he and his wife,
Christy, still had
three children
attending the school.
(Christy Rehm)
We just made the decision
that we would attend
school board meetings
and we would, you know, question
everything that was happening
and made sure that they had
answers for everything.
(Rehm)
If you walked in that door
for 30 seconds,
you knew what was going
on was not the way
it's supposed to happen.
It was that bad
and out of control.
(narrator)
The board were trying to drive
through a new proposal
to introduce a textbook
that contained the theory
of intelligent design.
(Jeff Brown)
At the very next meeting,
that's when they proposed
that we change the curriculum
to make a special reference
to this book.
The room was hot;
it was crowded,
and there were just people
lined up along the wall,
waiting for their turn
to speak to this board
and plead with them,
"Don't do this."
(Jeff Brown)
Finally the board voted,
six to three,
to change the curriculum,
at which point,
my wife and I
both resigned.
We couldn't stop these clowns.
That was the feeling I had.
They crossed a line
with that vote.
They went from protecting
their religion
to promoting
their religion,
and that I could not
countenance.
We couldn't.
(narrator)
For the Rehms and other parents
opposed to the policy,
they still had
a chance: the law.
They would sue the board
for promoting religion
in the science class.
[gospel music]
(women)
* When God dips His love
in my heart. *
(Weinstock)
11 parents of Dover students
are now in court,
suing the Dover school district
over exposing their children
to a controversial concept
called "intelligent design,"
a theory that they say
promotes religion
and creates false doubts
about evolution.
(Rehm)
We need to do this
for the community.
These people,
this small minority
that's on
the school board,
has really hijacked
this town
and taken it down
the wrong pathway.
And nobody seems to be
stopping it.
Nobody seems to be trying
to stop them, and it's wrong.
So if no one else is going to do
it, it's my last shot.
I'm going to try and stop them,
because I know it's wrong.
People are starting
to wake up,
and I'm hoping we can change it
before it's too late.
(narrator)
The stage was set for the latest
round of the evolution wars.
The world's media
descended.
May I have
your name, sir?
Yeah, my name is
Matthew Chapman.
And what is your relationship
with Charles Darwin?
He was my great-great
grandfather.
(woman)
At this courthouse,
evolution and intelligent design
are at the center
of a national debate,
and it's not the first time
evolution has been put on trial.
Some say it's the Scopes trial
all over again,
just reversed.
(narrator)
The local spat
had gone global.
The board members were advised
to stay silent by their lawyer.
He would present
their case to the world.
(man)
Should the ninth grade
biology students
be made aware
of the fact
that there is a controversy
in the scientific community
about Darwin's
theory of evolution?
(narrator)
Finally, the scientific claims
of intelligent design
would be put
to the ultimate test.
The positive proposition that
life could have been created
by an intelligent designer
is not science.
(narrator)
If intelligent design was found
to be based on religion,
it would not only be barred
from the Dover classroom,
but its scientific validity
would be ruined.
(male announcer)
The first witness called
by attorneys for the parents
was Dr. Kenneth Miller.
(narrator)
One of the scientists leading
the defense of Darwin's theory
was biologist
Kenneth Miller.
[applause]
For years,
Miller had lectured nationwide,
alerting audiences
to the perceived threat he saw
in intelligent design.
Right now we are losing
the battle for public opinion
on this issue.
These guys have had
a field day,
and they've captured
the popular imagination.
(narrator)
Miller had drawn together
the scientific evidence
to respond to
intelligent design's claims.
(Miller)
Many bacterium
have little flagella,
whiplike structures
that propel them
through the cell,
and you can see them
in this electron micrograph.
(narrator)
Miller targeted the pillar
of intelligent design,
Michael Behe's argument
of irreducible complexity
and its most vivid example,
the flagellum.
(Miller)
The notion
of intelligent design
or irreducible complexity
makes a prediction
that if intelligent design
is the proper explanation,
the parts of these
complex machines
should be useless
on their own,
because all the parts
have to be there
to have any function
whatsoever.
(narrator)
Miller quickly discovered,
amongst the scientific
literature,
evidence that
challenged Behe.
Within the flagellum
there was a simpler
functioning mechanism,
a bacterial syringe.
(Miller)
This system
is missing 40
of its 50 parts--
80%--and it is
perfectly functional.
So the kindest thing
one can say about this claim,
which is
the essential claim
of irreducible
complexity/intelligent design,
is that it's wrong.
It is simply wrong
on the basis of the science.
(narrator)
For Miller, the prediction
of irreducible complexity
was disproved.
The flagellum
could be broken down
into other simpler
biological mechanisms.
In two days
of testimony,
Miller attempted to knock
down the arguments
for intelligent design,
one by one.
Also on his hit list:
Dembski's criticism
of evolution
that it was simply
too improbable.
(Miller)
One of the mathematical tricks
employed by intelligent design
involves taking
the present-day situation
and calculating
probabilities
that the present
would have appeared randomly
from events in the past.
And the best example
I can give
is to sit down
with four friends,
shuffle a deck of 52 cards
and deal them out
and keep
an exact record
of the order in which
the cards were dealt.
We could then
look back and say,
"My goodness,
how improbable this is.
"We could play cards
for the rest of our lives,
"and we would never,
ever deal the cards
out in this
exact same fashion."
You know what?
That's absolutely correct.
Nonetheless,
you dealt them out,
and nonetheless,
you got the hand that you did.
(narrator)
For Miller,
Dembski's maths
did not add up.
The chances
of life evolving,
just like the chance of getting
a particular hand of cards,
could not be
calculated backwards.
By doing so, the odds
were unfairly stacked.
Played that way, cards and life
would always appear impossible.
With the trial
reaching a climax,
the argument intensified.
Contrary to Professor Miller,
I think Darwinism,
to a large degree,
acts to stifle science
in some respects.
The scientific evidence
from the bacterial flagellum,
from the molecular machinery
in the cell,
just points to design.
It doesn't address
the question
of how that design
was put in place.
By the terms
of the advocates
of intelligent design
themselves,
the designer creates
outside of nature,
supernaturally, by means
that are undetectable.
And if those means
are undetectable,
they're not susceptible
to scientific observation
or analysis.
And therefore,
the whole idea is not science.
A theory that explains
everything,
in fact,
explains nothing.
And that's the central flaw
of intelligent design.
(narrator)
The destiny
of intelligent design
would now be in the hands
of the judge.
Scientists round the world
waited.
(Dawkins)
Design needs
to postulate an entity
at least
as complicated,
at least as
high-information content,
at least
as irreducibly complex,
as that which it
is supposed to explain.
It therefore is a total lack
of explanation.
It doesn't explain
anything,
because it can't
explain itself.
(Attenborough)
Science is an observation-based
way of thinking.
If you then move
from that and say,
"We can't find
any evidence,
and therefore it was made
by God or something or other,"
that simply moves
into a totally different kind
of intellectual discourse
and is utterly different.
It becomes
not objective,
which all science is,
but subjective.
(narrator)
The stakes
couldn't be higher.
The conflict had spread
to the world's largest
Christian congregation,
the Roman Catholic Church.
In July 2005, one of the most
powerful men in the church,
the archbishop of Vienna,
wrote an article
in one of America's
most influential newspapers.
These few words
supporting intelligent design
had broken the church's silence
over the issue.
It triggered a crisis.
(Coyne)
He's a high churchman.
He's close to the pope.
He had to know that it
would have ramifications.
[dramatic church choir music]
*
(narrator)
Father George Coyne
has devoted his life
to reconciling the findings
of science with God.
A Jesuit priest
and astrophysicist,
he is also director
of one of the key scientific
bodies within the faith,
the Vatican Observatory.
(Coyne)
Churchmen above all
are tired of this materialistic
interpretation of science.
And so when they hear the word
"God designed it,"
they're immediately
on the hook.
A lot of them are not capable
of distinguishing
that that hook
is double-barbed.
So the ground is fertile
for the influence
of intelligent design,
to my mind.
*
(narrator)
Darwin's theory has never sat
easily with Catholic belief,
but over
a 50-year period,
culminating
with Pope John Paul II,
the church
came to accept
that Darwin's theory
was no obstacle to faith.
Then came the article
from Cardinal Schoenborn.
(Coyne)
I don't think he appreciated
what an uproar he would create
by saying--which he said
very clearly--
neo-Darwinian evolution
is not compatible
with Catholic doctrine.
And that's wrong.
It is compatible
with Catholic doctrine.
(narrator)
Months after
Pope John Paul II's death,
Schoenborn was reigniting
the argument over evolution.
He was embracing
intelligent design.
(Coyne)
If the pope was living,
he could have never gotten
away with that, okay?
He would have been
called in.
(narrator)
But behind Schoenborn's article,
there appeared to be
other forces at work.
He was known to be in contact
with an official
of the leading
intelligent design think tank,
the Discovery Institute.
There is one
Discovery fellow who knew him
and encouraged him
to write on this.
And you asked if that was
beyond the remit
of a scientific organization.
Beyond a strictly
scientific organization, yes.
The--our--we have a think tank;
we're concerned--
the Discovery Institute
is concerned--
about developing
the scientific research
but also about the cultural
implications of the issues.
(narrator)
Later, it came to light
that the article
had been passed
to The New York Times
by the institute's
public relations agency.
The move provoked outrage
amongst Catholic scientists
the world over.
(Coyne)
Intelligent design
is a movement.
They use every opportunity
they can to--
it's a scare word;
it's not a nice word to use--
to manipulate.
There was some report
that, you know,
the Discovery Institute
had used him as a puppet
or something, but this was
clearly his own initiative.
He has been used,
Cardinal Schoenborn,
has been used by the
intelligent design movement,
to the extent
that I'm not sure
he wrote The New York Times
op-ed piece himself.
(narrator)
Cardinal Schoenborn has since
qualified his criticism
of evolutionary theory.
(Coyne)
Intelligent design is a movement
on behalf of religion,
and it's going to destroy
not just science but religion.
(narrator)
Through the whole affair,
proponents of intelligent
design stood by their claim
that it is science
and have never stated
who the designer is.
(Meyer)
People who uphold a traditional
theistic perspective
certainly welcome the results
of our scientific work,
because the God of theism
is one possible candidate
for who the designer
might be.
Well, when you say,
"Who's the designer,"
if we're asking, for instance,
with the bacterial flagellum,
did God specifically toggle
those DNA or those proteins,
I would say I don't know.
It's a possibility.
I certainly find it, you know,
convenient to think
that God is the designer,
and certainly
He has to be considered
a major candidate
if you're a theist,
but other people
might have other ideas.
(narrator)
In December 2005,
the movement came face to face
with its delicate balancing
of science and religion.
A judgment on the Dover school
case was finally handed down.
Well, Kirsten,
this 139-page opinion
that was released today
reads like a searing indictment
of the concept
of intelligent design,
the Dover-area
school board,
and its implementation of that
intelligent design policy.
And this is absolutely
an early Christmas present
for those Dover parents
who brought the lawsuit.
(narrator)
The judge had identified
a clear religious purpose
behind the scientific claims
of intelligent design.
It was an
unequivocal defeat.
Intelligent design was no more
scientific than creationism.
But this war on science
is far from over.
(Miller)
The Dover case may just be
the first in many battles
to follow on the issue
of intelligent design.
But I think ultimately
the battle in this country
is not going to be won or lost
in the courtroom.
It's going to be won or lost
in the hearts and minds
of the American people
in how they regard science.
We could lose
our scientific soul
and cease being a country
that is hospitable,
warm, welcoming,
and nurturing to science.
And losing that, I think,
would be a great tragedy.
(Dawkins)
Evolution has a massive amount
of evidence in its favor,
and it explains, let's say,
99% of what we know about life.
The remaining 1%
remains to be discovered.
Intelligent design
explains precisely zero.
(Attenborough)
We would be wrong to suppose
that evolution
is the ultimate answer
to everything.
But nonetheless,
nobody has yet demonstrated
there's a failing.
If you find something
you don't understand,
of course you can say,
"Well, it was created
by a divine spirit,"
but that, of course,
answers nothing, really.
That simply says
we don't know.
Captioning by CaptionMax
www.captionmax.com